[26.1] Transfer API (#344)
neoforged/Documentation: docs/inventories/transactions.md

# Transactions

> Transactions are a NeoForged-added system for managing the communication between different inventories transferring their contents. Each transfer is managed through three basic concepts: the `Resource`s being transferred, the `ResourceHandler`s representing the inventory, and the `Transaction` facilitating the communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transactions are a NeoForged-added system for managing the communication between different inventories transferring their contents. Each transfer is managed through three basic concepts: the `Resource`s being transferred, the `ResourceHandler`s representing the inventories, and the `Transaction` facilitating the communication.
```

## Resources

> `Resource`s represent the backing object that is transacted upon. Each `Resource` is meant to be immutable, containing what the object is rather than how much is being transferred. For example, the transaction 'five apples for an emerald', contains the `Resource`s 'apple' and 'emerald', not 'five apples' and 'one emerald'.

Reviewer: I'd word this a little differently. Something like "containing only what kind of object is used, not the amount of objects"

```java
// For some ResourceHandler<ItemResource> handler

// Get the resource stored in the handler.
ItemResource item = handler.getResource(0);
int count = handler.getAmountAsInt(0);

// Get information about the handler itself.
int handlerSize = handler.size();
int indexCapacity = handler.getCapacityAsInt(0);
boolean canUseApples = handler.isValid(0, ItemResource.of(Items.APPLE));

// Put a resource in at a specific index given some `TransactionContext` ctx.
int amountInserted = handler.insert(0, ItemResource.of(Items.APPLE), 5, ctx);
// Extract a resource given some `TransactionContext` ctx.
int amountExtracted = handler.extract(ItemResource.of(Items.APPLE), 2, ctx);
```

> There are many different types of `ResourceHandler`s depending on what the backing inventory is. Some handlers wrap around existing vanilla inventories (e.g., `VanillaContainerWrapper` for [`Container`s][container], `LivingEntityEquipmentWrapper` for a [living entity's][livingentity] equipment slots).

Reviewer: Is there a wrapper for the player inventory? If yes, it may be worth mentioning here.

        return object.count();
    }

    @Override
    protected ExampleObject getStackFrom(ExampleResource resource, int amount) {
        // Create the content from its resource.
        return new ExampleObject(resource.id(), amount, new HashMap<>(resource.flags()));
    }

    @Override
    protected int getCapacity(int index, ExampleResource resource) {
        // The capacity at a given index for the stored resource.
        return Integer.MAX_VALUE;
    }

    @Override
    protected ExampleObject copyOf(ExampleObject object) {
        // Constructs a copy of the content.
        return new ExampleObject(object.id(), object.count(), new HashMap<>(object.flags()));
    }

    @Override
    public boolean matches(ExampleObject object, ExampleResource resource) {
        // Check if an object matches the stored resource.
        return object.id() == resource.id() && object.flags().equals(resource.flags());
    }
}
```

:::tip
NeoForge also provides a `ResourceStacksResourceHandler`, using `ResourceStack`s as the stored contents, for `Resource` implementations that are themselves the actual objects within an inventory.
:::

### Energy Handler

> `EnergyHandler` is a trimmed down version of `ResourceHandler`, only containing one index storing a `long`. As such, it only checks how many units can be stored (`getCapacityAsLong` / `getCapacityAsInt`) along with how many units already stored (`getAmountAsLong` / `getAmountAsInt`). Additionally, `insert` and `extract` no longer take in an index since there's only one, and a `Resource` as the backing object is a primitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EnergyHandler` is a trimmed down version of `ResourceHandler`, only containing one index storing a `long`. As such, it only checks how many units can be stored (`getCapacityAsLong` / `getCapacityAsInt`) along with how many units already stored (`getAmountAsLong` / `getAmountAsInt`). Additionally, `insert` and `extract` no longer take in an index since there's only one, and also no longer require a `Resource`, as the backing object is a primitive.
```

> Like `ResourceHandler`, there are different types of `EnergyHandler`s depending on usecase. The most common is `SimpleEnergyHandler`, which provides a basic implementation along with any limits on insert / extract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like `ResourceHandler`, there are different types of `EnergyHandler`s depending on your use case. The most common one is `SimpleEnergyHandler`, which provides a basic implementation along with a limit for insert / extract.
```

All NeoForge `ResourceHandler` implementations use the `SnapshotJournal` in some fashion, either directly on the handler itself or as a field within. It's only when making new `ResourceHandler`s that the `SnapshotJournal` needs to be implemented.

```java
// We can use the stored object as the snapshot value since we only ever
// need to keep track of one index.
public class ExampleResourceHandler extends SnapshotJournal<ExampleObject> implements ResourceHandler<ExampleResource> {

    private ExampleObject object;

    public ExampleResourceHandler(ExampleObject object) {
        // ...
    }
    
    // ...

    @Override
    protected ExampleObject createSnapshot() {
        // Create a snapshot of the object.
        // This should be immutable.
        ExampleObject original = this.object;
        this.object = new ExampleObject(

>             original.id(), original.count(), new HashMap<>(original.flags())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            original.id(), original.count(), ImmutableMap.copyOf(original.flags())
```
For proper immutability.

> # Transactions

Reviewer 2: This should be transfer, not transactions, no?

Reviewer 2: It is important to note that transactions are only used for operations that modify an inventory. Reading an inventory for example does not require the use of transactions. Similarly, resources are a concept that goes beyond transactions or even inventories. For example `Set<ItemResource>` might be the cleanest way to represent the items allowed by a filter.

Author: In my understanding, the whole purpose of the resource and resource handling was because of the transaction system. Without the transaction system, I do not really understand the benefit of using resources over vanilla implementations or the caps we had previously.

Also, transfer is a verb, which feels a bit awkward for a title. Same with 'transfer API', as I don't think that accurately describes what you would use these systems for. Hence, I decided to focus on transaction for the purpose of the piece and explaining it through that lens.

Though, we can always think of a better title or a way to frame this.

Reviewer 3: > Without the transaction system, I do not really understand the benefit of using resources over vanilla implementations or the caps we had previously.

Yes, that is why resource handlers are intrinsically linked to using transactions for inserting/extracting from them (though querying contents without any claims about if they can be inserted/extracted). The main improvements resource handlers have over the old system or vanilla is: transactions, and being generic. I think what tech meant in terms of the example of transactions not being necessary for reading the inventory, is that if you have a case where you can accept a certain set of resources, you don't need to open a transaction when seeing if the resource stored in an index is valid for your set, and then if it is valid you can open it before actually trying to extract from it.

That being said resources themselves are useful for general handling when you don't necessarily care about (item vs fluid vs modded types) for a piece of logic. Such as tech's example of in a modded filter to store the types that match without also storing the unused "count" or having to duplicate the filter's implementation between items and fluids.

    public static final ExampleObject EMPTY = new ExampleObject(-1, 0, Map.of());

    public static final Codec<ExampleObject> CODEC = RecordCodecBuilder.of(instance ->
        instance.group(
            ExtraCodecs.NON_NEGATIVE_INT.fieldOf("id").forGetter(ExampleObject::id),
            ExtraCodecs.NON_NEGATIVE_INT.optionalFieldOf("count", 1).forGetter(ExampleObject::count),
            Codec.unboundedMap(Codec.STRING, Codec.BOOL).optionalFieldOf("flags", Map::of).forGetter(ExampleObject::flags)
        ).apply(instance, ExampleObject::new)
    );

    private final int id;
    private final Map<String, Boolean> flags;
    private int count;

    public ExampleObject(int id, int count, Map<String, Boolean> flags) {
        // ...
    }

    public int id() {
        return this.id;
    }

    public int count() {
        return this.count;
    }

    public void setCount(int count) {
        this.count = count;
    }

    public Map<String, Boolean> flags() {
        return this.flags;
    }
}

// Create our resource.
public final class ExampleResource implements Resource {

    private final ExampleObject object;

    public ExampleResource(ExampleObject object) {

>         // Enforce immutability and ignore count.

Reviewer 2: This is not the greatest example IMO, it's very specific to the case of wrapping a mutable stack. Ideally one would only deal in immutable resources (or at least consider it strongly when writing entirely new code).

Author: I wanted the example to be transferrable to existing resources, since both the item and fluid implementations make use of a backing mutable object. I believe it gets the immutability portion across clearly. Though, if you have a better idea, please give it a whirl.

        return this.object.id() == -1;
    }

    // Equality for classes is defined by implementing `hashCode`
    // and `equals`. Records already do this for you.
    @Override
    public int hashCode() {
        // Since our backing object is not unique by itself, we
        // extract the components that make it unique and construct
        // the hash.
        return Objects.hash(this.object.id(), this.object.flags());
    }

    @Override
    public boolean equals(Object obj) {
        // Check identity equality.
        if (this == obj) return true;
        // Check if same class.
        if (obj == null || this.getClass() != obj.getClass()) return false;
        // Check the individual components of the resource.
        ExampleResource other = (ExampleResource) obj;
        return this.object.id() == other.object.id()
            && this.object.flags().equals(other.object.flags());
    }

    // Just an ease of convenience to more easily understand what
    // the resource is representing.
    @Override
    public String toString() {
        return Integer.toString(this.object.id()) + "[" 
            + this.object.flags().size() + "]";
    }
}
```

:::note

> While `Resource`s can be used for primitives, they are not strictly necessary (e.g., energy does not have a `Resource` as it is backed by a `long`). However, it does require reimplementing some of the resource behavior yourself, as the [handler system described below][handler] requires the use of a `Resource`.

Reviewer 2: What is a "primitive" here?

Author: Java primitive like an `int`, `long`, `float`, etc. This is my understanding after seeing that `EnergyHandler` does not have a backing resource.

:::

## Resource Handlers

> `ResourceHandler<T>`s represent the backing inventories within a transaction, where `T` is the type of the `Resource` backing the object. Each handler maps to its associated contents using an index (e.g., index `0` maps to slot 1, index `1` maps to slot 2, etc). For every index, you can check whether a `Resource` can be contained at the location (`isValid`) or what `Resource` is already stored there (`getResource`). You can also check how many `Resource`s can be stored at the location (`getCapacityAsLong` / `getCapacityAsInt`) along with how many of a `Resource` is stored there (`getAmountAsLong` / `getAmountAsInt`). The number of indices accessible to the handler represents its `size`.

Reviewer 2: > the backing inventories within a transaction

not really; you don't need a transaction to read from an inventory

Author: True, though this document was originally framed through the lens of a transaction.

> `ResourceHandler<T>`s represent the backing inventories within a transaction, where `T` is the type of the `Resource` backing the object. Each handler maps to its associated contents using an index (e.g., index `0` maps to slot 1, index `1` maps to slot 2, etc). For every index, you can check whether a `Resource` can be contained at the location (`isValid`) or what `Resource` is already stored there (`getResource`). You can also check how many `Resource`s can be stored at the location (`getCapacityAsLong` / `getCapacityAsInt`) along with how many of a `Resource` is stored there (`getAmountAsLong` / `getAmountAsInt`). The number of indices accessible to the handler represents its `size`.

Reviewer 2: > index `0` maps to slot 1, index `1` maps to slot 2, etc

this is IMO confusing; why mix 0-indexing and 1-indexing?

Author: I can say first slot, second slot instead. I just wanted to subtly hint at the mapping is just an index to an arbitrary slot. You could have the handler's index read the inventory in the reverse order if you so choose.

To modify the contents of the backing inventory, `ResourceHandler` provides two methods: `insert` to put a `Resource` in, and `extract` to take a `Resource` out. `insert` and `extract` take in three arguments: the `Resource` being operated upon, the `int` amount to put in / take out, and a `TransactionContext` representing what [transaction] that is performing the operation, returning the amount put in / taken out. Both of these methods will find the first indices available to put in / take out the contents to / from. If the handler should only transact on one specific index, then both `insert` and `extract` provide an overload that takes in the `int` index to put in / take out `Resource`s to / from.

```java
// For some ResourceHandler<ItemResource> handler

// Get the resource stored in the handler.
ItemResource item = handler.getResource(0);
int count = handler.getAmountAsInt(0);

// Get information about the handler itself.
int handlerSize = handler.size();
int indexCapacity = handler.getCapacityAsInt(0);

> boolean canUseApples = handler.isValid(0, ItemResource.of(Items.APPLE));

Reviewer 2: "use"?

Author: Shh... should be accept.

// Put a resource in at a specific index given some `TransactionContext` ctx.
int amountInserted = handler.insert(0, ItemResource.of(Items.APPLE), 5, ctx);
// Extract a resource given some `TransactionContext` ctx.

> int amountExtracted = handler.extract(ItemResource.of(Items.APPLE), 2, ctx);

Reviewer 2: I would probably avoid showing I/O code without the `tx.commit()` and the wrapping `try` block.

Author: Fine with me, though then that really limits the general explanation of resource handling to the transaction lens as, although the specific implementations may have direct get and set methods, the base interface is built with transactions in mind.

```

There are many different types of `ResourceHandler`s depending on what the backing inventory is. Some handlers wrap around existing vanilla inventories (e.g., `VanillaContainerWrapper` for [`Container`s][container], `PlayerInventoryWrapper` for [player `Inventory`s][playerinv], `LivingEntityEquipmentWrapper` for a [living entity's][livingentity] equipment slots).

```java

> // Wrapping around an existing inventory.

Reviewer 2: container? ;)

Author: Look, all containers are inventories if you think about it. Not `Inventory` of course :p.

Container container = new SimpleContainer(5);
ResourceHandler<ItemResource> containerWrapper = VanillaContainerWrapper.of(container);

// Wrapping around a `Player` player inventory.
ResourceHandler<ItemResource> playerInv = PlayerInventoryWrapper.of(player);

// Wrapping around a specific equipment slot for some LivingEntity entity.
ResourceHandler<ItemResource> head = LivingEntityEquipmentWrapper.of(entity, EquipmentSlot.HEAD);
```

Other handlers are themselves inventories, providing a convenience for those wanting to make use of the system without much implementing (e.g., `ItemStacksResourceHandler` for a list of [`ItemStack`s][itemstack], `FluidStacksResourceHandler` for a list of `FluidStack`s).

```java
// Creating an `ItemStack` storage.

> ItemStacksResourceHandler itemStorage = new ItemStacksResourceHandler(5);

Reviewer 2: This is likely the first thing that should be shown, as it's what we want people to use (equivalent to the old `ItemStackHandler`).

Author: I think we need to have more of a discussion here then since I believe this is less important here and more important in another inventory doc.

// Creating a `FluidStack` storage.
FluidStacksResourceHandler fluidStorage = new FluidStacksResourceHandler(
    // The size of the handler
    5,
    // The maximum capacity of every index
    1000
);
```

:::note
If you plan to use one of the `StacksResourceHandler`s as an inventory, it is highly recommended to override `onContentsChanged` to handle any disk writing or network syncing.

```java
// Example for block entities
public class ExampleBlockEntity extends BlockEntity {

    private final ItemStacksResourceHandler storage = new ItemStacksResourceHandler(5) {
        @Override
        protected void onContentsChanged(int index, ItemStack previousContents) {

>             // Mark the block entity as dirty

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            // Schedule the block entity for saving
```
or similar... "mark dirty" is old terminology

Author: Fair enough.

    }

    @Override
    public boolean isValid(int index, ExampleResource resource) {
        // Whether the resource can be set at the index, regardless of its
        // current contents.
        Objects.checkIndex(index, this.size());
        // Make sure the resource isn't empty.
        TransferPreconditions.checkNonEmpty(resource);
        return true;
    }

    @Override
    public int insert(int index, ExampleResource resource, int amount, TransactionContext transaction) {
        // Inserts the resource into the given index, returning the amount put in.

        // Validate arguments.
        Objects.checkIndex(index, size());
        TransferPreconditions.checkNonEmptyNonNegative(resource, amount);

        // Check whether the resource can be inserted from this location.
        ExampleObject current = this.object;
        if (current.count() == 0 || (current.id() == resource.id() && current.flags().equals(resource.flags()) && this.isValid(index, resource))) {
            // Compute the amount to insert.
            int insertedAmount = Math.min(amount, this.getCapacityAsInt(index, resource) - current.count());

            if (insertedAmount > 0) {

>                 // Update the content.

Reviewer 2: This needs a call to `updateSnapshots(transaction)` (which also requires extending from `SnapshotJournal`) for correctness, otherwise the change will not be rolled back correctly. So I would maybe keep custom implementations for the end as a more advanced example.

Author: I have that in the example below. The example here is just to provide an understanding of what the handler is doing. Then, we integrate it into the transaction context.

                    this.object = new ExampleObject(
                        resource.id(), insertedAmount, new HashMap<>(resource.flags())
                    );
                } else {
                    this.object.setCount(current.count() + insertedAmount);
                }

                // Return the amount inserted.
                return insertedAmount;
            }
        }

        // If not matching, insert nothing.
        return 0;
    }

    @Override
    public int extract(int index, ExampleResource resource, int amount, TransactionContext transaction) {
        // Extracts the contents from the given index, returning the amount taken out.

        // Validate arguments.
        Objects.checkIndex(index, size());
        TransferPreconditions.checkNonEmptyNonNegative(resource, amount);

        // Check whether the resource can be extracted from this location.
        ExampleObject current = this.object;
        if (current.id() == resource.id() && current.flags().equals(resource.flags())) {
            // Compute the amount to extract.
            int extracted = Math.min(current.count(), amount);

            if (extracted > 0) {

>                 // Update the content.

Reviewer 2: Same, this needs `updateSnapshots`.

Author: Same as above where this is just an example of how it's implemented, with the snapshot stuff coming below.

        // Constructs the resource from the content.
        return new ExampleResource(object);
    }

    @Override
    public int getAmountFrom(ExampleObject object) {
        // Gets the amount from the content.
        return object.count();
    }

    @Override
    protected ExampleObject getStackFrom(ExampleResource resource, int amount) {
        // Create the content from its resource.
        return new ExampleObject(resource.id(), amount, new HashMap<>(resource.flags()));
    }

    @Override
    protected int getCapacity(int index, ExampleResource resource) {
        // The capacity at a given index for the stored resource.
        return Integer.MAX_VALUE;
    }

    @Override
    protected ExampleObject copyOf(ExampleObject object) {
        // Constructs a copy of the content.
        return new ExampleObject(object.id(), object.count(), new HashMap<>(object.flags()));
    }

    @Override
    public boolean matches(ExampleObject object, ExampleResource resource) {
        // Check if an object matches the stored resource.
        return object.id() == resource.id() && object.flags().equals(resource.flags());
    }
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: This is missing a discussion of the `ResourceHandlerUtil` methods, which are very helpful for making efficient use of the API.

Author: Probably because I forgot all about it.

:::

### Energy Handler

`EnergyHandler` is a trimmed down version of `ResourceHandler`, only containing one index storing a `long`. As such, it only checks how many units can be stored (`getCapacityAsLong` / `getCapacityAsInt`) along with how many units already stored (`getAmountAsLong` / `getAmountAsInt`). Additionally, `insert` and `extract` no longer take in an index since there's only one, and also no longer require a `Resource`, as the backing object is a primitive.

Like `ResourceHandler`, there are different types of `EnergyHandler`s depending on your use case. The most common one is `SimpleEnergyHandler`, which provides a basic implementation along with a limit for insert / extract.

```java
// Create an energy handler.
EnergyHandler energy = new SimpleEnergyHandler(1000);

// Put energy in given some `TransactionContext` ctx.
int amountInserted = energy.insert(100, ctx);
// Take energy out given some `TransactionContext` ctx.
int amountExtracted = energy.extract(10, ctx);
```

### Item Access

> `ItemAccess` is also a trimmed down version of `ResourceHandler`, providing access to a single item in a specific storage location. As such, it only provides the resource (`getResource`) and amount of the item currently present (`getAmount`). Additionally, `insert` and `extract` no longer take in an index since there's only one. However, as items can also store data, the `ItemAccess` provides a way to access the stored data in through [capabilities] via `getCapability`, assuming it is an `ItemCapability` with an `ItemAccess` context.

Reviewer 2: I guess it is a trimmed down version, but the key point is really that this is used by item capabilities to modify their item stack.
